# E-Commerce Database Management System

## Introduction
This project primarily focuses on exploring database design and various aspects related to the database management system for ‘Kart’ an e-commerce business. 

‘Kart’ is an online shopping platform for consumer items of the latest trends and styles. This project explores the life cycle of a product from the time the customer places an order to when the customer receives their order; from a business and database management perspective. The project also shows use of analytics to calculate revenue, find business opportunities in products of high demand, use of purchase pattern recognition for personalized recommendation to customers and gain a sense of customers’ engagement rate with the application. These statistics can help the business improve their products and services for enhanced customer satisfaction. E-commerce business has to manage the consumer and merchant (seller) side of the business and logistics related to shipping. This project explores the consumer side of the business while the merchant and the logistics aspects of the business are beyond the scope of this project.

The main purpose of this project is to build an effective database management system for ‘Kart’ to fulfill all business requirements along with obtaining useful data insights guiding towards making better business decisions. Data for the project is a mix of real-world data and manually compiled data. The data for customers, current orders, order history and payments have been compiled in excel. Product details, product reviews are taken from Amazon website for real products. The data schema is prepared in MySQL workbench and the data has been uploaded from excel to MySQL Workbench. Data schema includes 10 entities with multiple attributes to capture customer and orders related information. The dataset helps us understand the life cycle of a customer’s order from the moment an order is placed. 

## Entities and Attributes
  - **Customer:** This entity is created to hold information about the customer and their demographic. Each customer has to be assigned with a unique customer_id. Each time a customer places an order, a new order_id is generated. This allows us to track multiple purchases made by the same customer.
  - **Current Order:** This entity is created to hold information about the current orders i.e. order in process and yet to be delivered. When an order is placed the order status of record is I (i.e. in progress) or R if return request is placed by customer. Order status changes to S when the order is picked for shipping. Separate entity created for current orders as the order in process goes through multiple updates.
  - **Order History** When an order is delivered to the customer, order status is changed from S to C (i.e. complete), or when the return order reaches the seller then order status changes from S to R (i.e. returned). It is assumed that the backend software system moves the order record from current_order table to order_history table once the order is complete/returned.
  - **Order Item:** This entity contains information about the item which is ordered by the customer. It has the item id, order id, price and the limit date for the product to be shipped. The limit date acts like a deadline for sellers to ship the product to the relevant address. For each product in the current order and order history, a new order item record will be created.
  - **Payment:** Customers have the option to pay the due amount using multiple payment methods e.g. credit card, voucher, debit card. This entity attribute helps collect the various payment methods used by the customer for a particular order. When different payment methods are used by customers to pay for the same order, then payment_sequential attribute is incremented by 1 for each new payment method. Order_id and payment_sequential makes a composite key for the payment table. Additionally, customers can opt to pay in installment for any particular payment method. For example, a customer can choose to pay $50 by credit_ card payment method in two installments of $25. In that case payment_installment attribute collects information about the number of installments i.e. 2.
  - **User Session:** This entity holds information about the time spent by the customers on the Kart website. An online session is established, and a unique session number is created whenever a customer visits a website/ application. User session table records the start time and end time of the session and the number of clicks. This data is useful for the purpose of customer analytics.
  - **Login**: This entity is created to store the login details of the customer enabling the customer to login easily repeatedly. For example, login id and password.
  - **Order Review:** This entity records the reviews or feedback from the customer for a product in order_item entity table. The attribute Review score is the feedback given by the customer based on a 5-star review. 
  - **Product**: This entity is created to collect information related to the product. They collect Product dimensions information like weight, height, width and other details such as product name, category, unit price is recorded.
  - **Seller:** This entity is created to store the seller information like seller demographics and assigns unique seller_id to each seller. This table can help to match customers’ order with sellers based on zip codes to reduce the shipping cost.
  
## Inference

The project helped to gain an overall sense of organizational structure and database management from an e-commerce business perspective. Additionally, it also helped to identify different functional areas in a business, entities associated with these functional areas and attributes related to it. While designing the model for the project, a better understanding of modelling relationship, cardinality of relationship, normalization to avoid anomalies in data in the relational model was obtained. The project also gave hands-on experience of creating end-to-end relational database management systems in MySQL workbench.

It was crucial to note that while inserting data into the entity tables, the attribute length or data type should not be mismatched between different entity tables as this will cause an impediment when joining the tables and creating the database. The takeaway here is the importance of referential integrity in databases in the process of creating data schema and inserting data in entity tables.

